GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Hungary declares a state of
crisis, as refugees flood its
border,
while at least 22 migrants die
after a boat capsizes off the
coast of Turkey.
Also ahead this Tuesday: In
Seattle, a tentative deal is
reached to end a teachers
strike.
Plus, with two women running for
president, we look at Republican
efforts to court female
voters ahead of
tomorrow's debate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Of the 15
presidential candidates, of
course, Fiorina will be the only
woman
debating tomorrow night, and
that's an issue for Republicans.
How do they get more women
to run for president? Well, some
say they need to encourage more
women to run for other
offices.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The many thousands
on a desperate journey into
Europe's heartland hit the wall
today, literally. A barrier
fence sealed off the length of
Hungary's southern frontier,
the main land route
for the migrants.
James Mates of Independent
Television News reports from the
scene.
JAMES MATES: "Open, open," they
cry, 2,000 or more refugees
pressing against Hungary's
newly fortified border with its
southern neighbor, Serbia.
There has been a human river
flowing northward for weeks.
This is what happens when you
try
to top stop that flow. The crowd
have been growing since early
morning as the first arrivals
confronted the new three-meter
high razor wire fence, one
obstacle too many in their
bid to get to Germany. Instead,
they must walk along it to an
official transit center
built from shipping containers.
The thousands walking this trail
can enter Hungary through this
door and this door alone,
and the wait will be
interminable. They have traveled
hundreds of miles to get here.
They
find this quite literally the
door into the E.U. And it's
shut. So, they waited, in a
field, in the blazing
sun all day.
A former prime minister
of Hungary came to look.
MAN: It's terrible, what we are
seeing here. It's terrible.
JAMES MATES: He was disgusted by
what his successor was doing.
Mohammed al-Mahaney (ph)
from Damascus, spotting a senior
Hungarian, asked for her to find
his wife, who crossed
the border without him. Mohammed
now admits, if he had known what
was waiting for him,
he might never have left Syria.
MAN: Hopefully. Look at this.
JAMES MATES: Is this
what you expected?
MAN: Of course not. This is
because I tried to be legal.
This is only because I tried
to be legal. They want us to be
illegal? This fence will not
help them.
JAMES MATES: Patience quickly
ran out. Demanding the right to
go to Germany, they sat in the
middle of a main motorway
between Hungary and Serbia. If
they weren't going to cross
the border, nor was anyone else.
Women brought tiny babies up to
the austere metal fence,
pleading to be let through.
Instead,
the bolts were tightened.
Nervous policemen gripped their
cans of tear gas in case there
was to be an assault.
It is a standoff. The Serbians
want this border open to relieve
the pressure they're under.
Many others in Europe believe
this is not how refugees should
be treated. But Hungary
has made this central to their
policy and seem unlikely to back
down.
GWEN IFILL: Hungary also began
enforcing new laws, arresting
174 people for trying to cross
illegally. In response, Serbia
started bussing migrants toward
Croatia, which also has a
border with Hungary. But the
Hungarians defended their
actions.
ZOLTAN KOVACS, Hungarian
Government Spokesman: The
freedom of movement, the freedom
of settlement,
the freedom of the flow of goods
is being endangered by the very
fact that illegal migrants
will come, will try to come at
will through the green borders.
And that is not going to
stop if Hungary is
not stopping them.
GWEN IFILL: In Washington,
President Obama met with the
king of Spain and expressed new
concern about the
crisis in Europe.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: We agreed that
this is going to require
cooperation
with all the European countries
and the United States and the
international community in
order to ensure that people are
safe, that they are treated with
shared humanity, and
that we ultimately have to deal
with the source of the problem,
which is the ongoing crisis
in Syria.
GWEN IFILL: There were new
casualties today among the
thousands of Syrians trying to
make
the journey. We will have a
report on that front in the
crisis after the news summary.
Losses mounted today from the
firestorm that swept part of
Northern California over the
weekend. Officials gained access
to more burned-out areas about
100 miles north of San
Francisco,
not far from Napa Valley.
Overnight, the count of homes
consumed by the Valley Fire
surged to 585, a number that
could rise even higher as the
big blaze keeps burning. At
least 9,000 more homes are in
its path. The massive fire has
engulfed 104 square miles across
three counties. In hard-hit
Middletown, the newly homeless
are trying to absorb the
enormity of their losses.
MAN: My house burnt up in
probably about 30 minutes. I
lived on Hoberg South, which is
basically where the fire
originated from. And we were at
a soccer game, got home a little
after 2:00 p.m. Our house was
gone by 3:00 and we really don't
have anything left.
GWEN IFILL: For those families,
donated clothing and food are on
hand at an evacuation center
at the Napa County Fairgrounds.
Many of the evacuees still don't
know if their homes and
belongings even survived.
MAN: I know everybody wants to
know, what -- what happens? When
do we get to go home?
It's not an easy question. You
get to go home when it's safe.
GWEN IFILL: Others are just
trying to maintain hope, in the
face of the devastation.
MAN: I'm not going to be defined
by things like this, you know?
It's -- you have a choice
of how you handle things in
life, and I think this is the
way I want to handle it,
positive.
We will move forward. We
will get through this.
GWEN IFILL: Nearly 2,400
firefighters are battling the
Valley Fire. By this morning,
it was only 15
percent contained.
One person died in the Valley
Fire: an elderly woman whose
body was found in the gutted
remains
of her home.
Another major wildfire has
burned nearly 200 homes and
outbuildings southeast of
Sacramento.
It's now about
one-third contained.
A small town in Utah is in
mourning tonight after flash
floods killed 12 people Monday
evening. One other was missing.
Authorities said a wall of water
smashed into Hildale,
just above the border with
Arizona. An SUV and a van
carrying women and children were
washed miles downstream by the
torrent triggered by a heavy
rainfall in a canyon above the
town. Flood warnings remained in
force today, with more storms in
the forecast.
In North Korea, state media
announced the communist nation's
nuclear fuel plants have
been upgraded and restarted.
That includes the main plutonium
enrichment site at Yongbyon.
Upgrades there could let the
North build new, more
sophisticated nuclear warheads.
Russian President Vladimir Putin
today strongly defended Moscow's
military aid to the government
of Syria. He said such
intervention is needed to defeat
the Islamic State group. Putin
spoke
in Tajikistan at a meeting of
ex-Soviet nations, and he urged
other countries to follow
Russia's
example.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
I would like to say that we are
supporting the government of
Syria in the fight against
terrorist aggression, and will
continue to offer military
technical assistance. It's clear
that without an active
participation
of the Syrian authorities and
the military, it would be
impossible to expel the
terrorists
from that country and
the region as a whole.
GWEN IFILL: Putin rejected
allegations that Russian support
has sparked the flow of refugees
out of Syria. He said the
situation would be even worse if
Moscow had not stepped in.
Desperate officials in Malaysia
turned to cloud-seeding today to
battle a smoky haze
that's blanketed swathes of
Southeast Asia. Planes will spew
chemicals into the air to
promote rainfall and clear the
air. The haze is coming from
illegal fires set in neighboring
Indonesia to clear land. It's so
bad, and dangerous to breathe,
that schools across
three states in Malaysia
had to close today.
Back in this country,
Hewlett-Packard announced up to
30,000 jobs will be cut when it
spins
off its software, consulting,
and data analysis business. H.P.
already shed thousands of
workers
in recent years amid falling
demand for its personal
computers and printers.
And Wall Street shot higher, as
weaker economic data raised
hopes that the Federal Reserve
might delay raising interest
rates. The Dow Jones industrial
average gained nearly 230
points to close at 16600. The
Nasdaq rose 54 points and the
S&P 500 added 25.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a state of crisis, as Europe
grapples with refugees;
how Republicans are trying to
court women voters; and much
more.
Now to another tragedy at sea.
Earlier today, a boat filled
past its capacity with migrants
and refugees capsized off the
Turkish coast, drowning
more than 20 people.
"PBS NewsHour"'s Malcolm
Brabant, who was on shore as
survivors returned to the
Turkish
city of Bodrum, reports tonight
on why so many are still willing
to take the risk.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The boat
capsized and sank less than two
miles after setting off from
Bodrum. More than 240 people
were packed into the
65-foot-long vessel, which was
normally
used for tourist trips. It was
heading for the nearby Greek
island of Kos, which has
become one of the main
entry points to Europe.
Turkish Coast Guards managed to
rescue 220 people, but 22
drowned, four of them children,
one a 16-day-old baby. The
survivors were brought back to
the coast guard station in
Bodrum, where medical teams were
on hand to deal with the trauma
of their experience.
A group of small children were
among the first to be placed on
special buses by police. The
whole drama was played out in
front of European tourists like
Harlene Bown, who had been to
Turkey for a day shopping and
were boarding boats back to
their resorts in Kos the legal
way.
HARLENE BOWN, Tourist: I have
got very mixed feelings over it,
obviously, sympathy for
some of them, and obviously
concern over the others.
MALCOLM BRABANT: What do you
think about the journeys they
have to make?
HARLENE BOWN: Oh, that's
terrible. We sit from our
balcony and watch the lanyards
go
in and out with them on. And
they're being pushed from pillar
to post. They must doubt
where their future lies
in the end of all this.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The regional
authorities drafted in extra
police to hunt down the
trafficking
gang responsible for this latest
Mediterranean tragedy. And three
men were taken away.
The going rate for the short
voyage to Europe is $1,000 a
head. So this one boatload could
have earned the people smugglers
a quarter-of-a-million dollars.
Officials at the coast guard
headquarters
suggested these men were
the prime suspects.
Excuse me, sir. Are you the
smuggler? Are you the smuggler
responsible for these people's
deaths? What's your
involvement in this?
The Turkish authorities have
kept us quite some distance away
from the survivors, but
we have been close enough to one
of the buses to hear the most
uncontrollable weeping coming
from a couple of people who have
lost relatives during the
sinking.
Now, these people haven't just
endured the most profound
personal tragedy. They have
also probably lost money to the
traffickers who were promising
them a new life in Europe.
And what's more, once the
Turkish authorities are finished
processing them, they're going
to take them away from the
Mediterranean, hundreds of miles
away, to the southeastern
part of Turkey, near to the
Syrian border to an overcrowded
refugee camp.
And perhaps then they will try
to escape and come and go
through this whole experience
one more time. Such tragedies
don't deter Abed al-Mughabel
(ph), a 21-year-old Syrian
student who spent the past three
years in Lebanon. He's already
had one failed crossing
after his boat was intercepted
by the Turkish coast guard, as
are many.
But he's ready to try again,
with the intention of getting to
Sweden.
MAN: I look at it as a
redemption, as a redemption, to
start a new life in these
countries, these
free countries, these free
countries where they respect the
human rights, all the human
rights. Yes.
MALCOLM BRABANT: How many -- it
is worth the risk going on the
boat? I mean, how scared
are you?
MAN: I mean, I have already been
in the boat for the first time.
I failed. I'm now going
back. It's not that hard,
because starve for the family is
hard, OK? When -- it's better
than to stay in Lebanon and die
slowly in there, without study
and nothing to do in
Lebanon. It's -- it's worth it
to go there. It's worth it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Have you got
something to give to Europe?
(CROSSTALK)
MAN: Yes, yes. If I study there,
I am willing to give the Europe
back what they gave me,
to give them back what they gave
me. If they gave me shelter, I
give them back my whole
energy to -- to build
their country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is Basmane
in the city of Izmir, which is
the gateway the Europe.
It's a magnet for Syrians and
scores of other nationalities.
We were taken to a smugglers
cafe by the head of the regional
refugee support group, Cem
Terzi, a consultant surgeon.
CEM TERZI, Surgeon: It's a
meeting point for smugglers and
the refugees all day, during
the day or during the night.
They are all coming together
here and talking and reaching
about a price.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The regional
government estimates that there
are 70,000 asylum-seekers in the
Izmir region, but professor
Terzi believes that the number
is really 400,000, half of
whom want to come to Europe. The
figures dwarf those that Europe
is concentrating resettling.
CEM TERZI: We are seeing, I
think, one of the most tragic
situations in history. At
the moment, three million people
are in Turkey, and at least half
of them are trying to go
to Europe and to survive, to
have better conditions, to get
refugee situation.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The professor
and other medical volunteers
offer a rudimentary health care
service for the thousands living
rough, where infection is rife
among the dirt and dust.
Turkey doesn't grant these
people full refugee status, and
so, unless they have money, they
are in serious trouble. As the
professor treated children with
bronchitis, we caught up with
Abed. He had found a smuggler,
who told him to go to a secret
rendezvous for a boat to
the Greek island of Samos.
How does this feel in terms of
your life? How much of an
important day is today?
MAN: It's -- it might be my best
day or might be my salvation
day.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And
what do you think?
MAN: What do I think of what?
MALCOLM BRABANT: What
is it going to be?
MAN: It's going to be,
hopefully, my salvation day.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And what
does salvation mean to you?
MAN: Salvation means start a new
life, find a new hope, not to
stay stuck here in Izmir
in Turkey and going back to
Lebanon and live a miserable
life.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In this corner
of Turkey, we have not been able
to discover where Abed
made it. This is the prosperous
and exotic Mediterranean,
tantalizingly close to Europe,
but, to refugees, it's an
illusion, for this is a deadly
sea.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Bodrum,
Turkey.
GWEN IFILL: German Chancellor
Angela Merkel today called for
an emergency summit next
Tuesday to deal with the refugee
and migrant crisis. The push
comes one day after European
ministers failed to reach a deal
on resettlement quotas. Some of
Germany's leaders have said
the nation could receive one
million people by the end of
this year.
For more on how the country and
continent are dealing with the
surge, I'm joined by
Germany's ambassador to the
United States Peter Wittig.
Thank you for joining us.
PETER WITTIG, German Ambassador
to the United States: It's a
pleasure to be here.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
this refugee summit that
Chancellor Merkel is calling
for.
Given the resistance which any
idea, any common solution had
met in Brussels, is there a
possibility
that there's some one
way to address this?
PETER WITTIG: Well, we have to
understand this is a crisis of
historic proportions.
Never, since the World War II,
have we seen that flow of
refugees pouring into Europe,
so small wonder that Europe was
ill-prepared for this momentous
crisis. But I think all
the countries have realized we
can only solve this together.
And it's a litmus test of
European
solidarity.
And that's why the chancellor
has called for an urgent summit,
to do basically two things,
provide more help for the
front-line states, those states
where the refugees transit
through
or enter the European Union,
help them manage the border,
help them to receive the
refugees
in a dignified manner, and help
to fight human trafficking.
And the second thing is, the
second challenge is to find a
fair and a fairer distribution
of those refugees among us. In a
way, this is a litmus test for
European solidarity.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me pick up
on that, because, last week, we
had a European Union
ambassador here sitting here
where you are. And his solution,
their solution was that
there be mandatory quotas
imposed, that certain countries,
every country in the E.U. would
have to take a certain
number of migrants.
And that has not been -- that
has not gone over well. So, is
that dead?
PETER WITTIG: It's not dead.
It's still on the table.
And the homeland security
ministers, they discussed this,
and they reached an agreement
that they would work together in
that direction. But some
countries have not embraced that
idea because of their domestic
politics, because they think
they can't receive that many
refugees.
It's not off the table,
but it's not all of it.
I think it's a package. We have
got to support those countries
that are receiving the refugees.
The first point of entry, like
Greece, like Italy, like
Hungary, we have got to enable
them to receive and process, is
the word, the refugees in a more
dignified way. And
then we have got to reform our
own asylum, Europe asylum
system, make it more coherent,
and then again, yes, a fairer
distribution of the refugees
among the European member
states.
It cannot be that just two or
three are bearing the brunt of
the burden.
GWEN IFILL: Well, among those
two or three was Germany.
Chancellor Merkel had her arms
wide open, and now, however, is
talking about border controls.
Is that a result of the domestic
resistance to this notion of
just throwing the doors
open?
PETER WITTIG: Well, the German
reaction to the refugee flow was
generally very welcoming.
We saw an outpour, an
overwhelming outpour of
solidarity by thousands and
thousands of
volunteers in Germany. And so
the reaction is still very
positive. But the sheer number
and the speed of the refugees,
they are -- now start to stretch
the capabilities of our country,
of the cities, of
the municipalities.
GWEN IFILL: Is it also the kinds
of refugees we're talking about?
You served in Lebanon,
if I'm not mistaken.
PETER WITTIG: I did.
GWEN IFILL: So you understand
that the people we're talking
about coming across these
borders
are not homogeneous, the way
they are in so many other
countries.
PETER WITTIG: Well, the first
concern is now to have a more
orderly process. And we have
got to house the refugees
decently, give them food, school
them.
And we have got to distinguish
between those who are really in
need of help, like the
asylum-seeker
who are politically persecuted,
or the refugees from Syria. For
instance, they need our help.
GWEN IFILL: How do you do that?
How do you make that
distinction, and then the extra
distinction between those who
are innocent and those who are
dangerous?
PETER WITTIG: Well, they have to
go through a process of
registration, and eventually
seeking asylum, getting asylum,
or getting the status of a
refugee.
And then we can help them and
welcome them for a longer time.
And there are others who
come for different reasons that
we might not be able to take in
for good. So, there are
security concerns also. We have
to know who is coming into our
countries.
So now we are at a point -- and
that's the backdrop of that
reintroduction of border
controls. We're not closing the
border, nor are we putting into
question the system of
free movement within Europe. But
that's an emergency measure, in
order to have a more
orderly process of entry
into our country.
GWEN IFILL: Is it different for
Germany, a country which is
perhaps more welcoming to
immigrants because you have an
aging population and you could
actually stand to have some
-- a greater influx
of new citizens?
PETER WITTIG: I think
it's a couple of reasons.
First of all, we have an
historic legacy. We know the
tremendous value of asylum,
countries
granting exile. We have our own
-- we had in our history the
Nazi dictatorship that
produced refugees, so we have
a very liberal asylum law.
I think we saw this compassion
in the German population which
was really heartwarming for
the victims of the civil war in
Syria. That's something -- I
served there, and, you know,
people are fleeing hell, fleeing
the barrel bombs of Assad and
the murderous swathes of
ISIL.
So I think that is what people
felt. They need to -- they
wanted to comply with
humanitarian
norms.
GWEN IFILL: You talked about the
war in Syria and what's driving
people out. How much
responsibility
does the European Union,
Germany, the United States have
to address or do something about
the root causes of what's
causing these people to flee?
PETER WITTIG: The root causes,
we have got to tackle.
And I think this refugee crisis
now should be a catalyst, if you
will, a new incentive
to once again try politically to
cope with this cruel, horrendous
civil war in Syria.
And I think a good occasion
would be the next meeting of the
U.N. General Assembly in two
weeks' time, where hopefully
leaders will sit together and
address that political challenge
to come to a political solution
in Syria that includes not only
the main segments of the
Syrian population, but also the
main powers of the region,
including Saudi Arabia and
Iran and others.
GWEN IFILL: Well, that certainly
will be at the top of someone's
agenda. We will see how
it plays out in New York.
Peter Wittig, U.S. -- German
ambassador to the United States,
thank you very much.
PETER WITTIG: Thank you, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Tomorrow night, the
Republican candidates for
president will gather once
again on a debate stage, this
time in California at the Ronald
Reagan Library.
The prime-time gathering will
feature at least one new face,
Carly Fiorina, whose very
presence
will highlight one key challenge
for Republicans: the need to
appeal to women voters.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins has a preview tonight
from Simi Valley.
LISA DESJARDINS: This townhouse
in Texas holds both the
challenge and the hope for
Republican
women.
Missy Shorey is setting up her
new home office in Dallas. From
this desk, she directs a
national
organization called Maggie's
List, named after Maine
Republican Margaret Chase Smith,
the
first woman to serve in both the
U.S. House and Senate. The prime
goal of Maggie's List?
Find, recruit and elect more
Republican women to office. A
secondary goal is to ramp up
Republican appeal to
women in general.
MISSY SHOREY, Maggie's List:
Women are not just a factor in
elections. They are the factor
in this election. And it's time
that people have finally done
the math and seen that,
indeed, we represent 53 percent
of the vote. And the sad reality
is, is that, as Republicans
and conservatives, we haven't
always done the best job at
reaching out.
LISA DESJARDINS: The last time a
majority of American women voted
for a Republican presidential
candidate was 1988. George H.W.
Bush edged out Michael Dukakis
with women in exit polls
that year.
But, since then, women have gone
the other way, choosing
Democrats. It is an advantage
Hillary Clinton and her
supporters are pressing.
WOMAN: We are all here to
kick off Women for Hillary.
LISA DESJARDINS: But a new poll
shows Hillary doesn't have a
lock on women's votes. Just
42 percent of Democratic-leaning
women say they support her, a
sharp drop from 71 percent
in July.
CARLY FIORINA (R), Presidential
Candidate: Thank you so very
much.
LISA DESJARDINS:
Enter Carly Fiorina.
CARLY FIORINA: If you're ready
for a woman president, how about
one who is honest and
competent and can do the job?
LISA DESJARDINS: Fiorina has
pushed back at Clinton, and
pushed out a conservative
definition
of feminism about
jobs and security.
And that brings us here, to
tomorrow's presidential debate,
where, of course, Fiorina will
be
the only woman on the debate
stage. That is a concern for
some Republicans. But how do
they get more women to run for
president? Some say they need to
encourage more women
to run for other offices, local,
state, and Congress. But that is
also a problem for Republicans.
You could see it in Congress
last week. House Republicans
leaving their weekly meeting
were
a line of men. Of 247
Republicans, just 23 are women.
Members like Utah's Jason
Chaffetz openly acknowledge it.
REP. JASON CHAFFETZ (R), Utah:
Well, we need as many female
candidates on the ballot as
we possibly can.
LISA DESJARDINS: We asked
Tennessee Congresswoman Diane
Black, who co-founded a women's
policy
group.
How do Republicans get
more women in Congress?
REP. DIANE BLACK (R), Tennessee:
Well, we, of course, have been
working on that for the
last several years. The
difficulty right now is the
there aren't a whole lot of
opportunities
out there for us, because we
have got a lot of seats that are
already -- 247 seats, so
it's -- it's difficult.
LISA DESJARDINS: And already
filled by men, yes.
REP. DIANE BLACK: Well, if men
then decide to retire -- we, of
course, aren't going to
primary our own guys. But if men
do decide to retire, we are
recruiting women for those
positions.
JENNIFER LAWLESS, Women &
Politics Institute, American
University: Democrats are way
ahead.
About between 60 and 70 percent
of the women who serve at the
state legislative and
congressional
levels are Democrats.
LISA DESJARDINS: Jennifer
Lawless runs the Women &
Politics Institute At American
University.
She also is a Democrat who
advises women in her party on
how to run for office.
JENNIFER LAWLESS: Hi. This is
Jennifer Lawless returning your
call.
LISA DESJARDINS: It may surprise
some, but she says reproductive
issues, Planned Parenthood
and abortion, divide women
almost evenly and do not
advantage either party
nationally.
What does matter? She says
economic fairness and diversity.
JENNIFER LAWLESS: We're talking
about the economy and national
security and a general
sense of what's the best
direction to move the country
forward. And women are generally
more likely to believe the
Democratic Party and the
Democratic Party's candidates
are
diverse and understand a diverse
group of people's preferences
and backgrounds and
circumstances.
LISA DESJARDINS: In Dallas,
Missy Shorey is pushing back
against Democrats, arguing that
jobs, the economy and taxes are
where conservatives can win with
women.
MISSY SHOREY: These are women's
issues. They're called
pocketbook issues. The reality
is that,
right now, 40 percent of all
households in the United States,
the primary breadwinner
is a woman. And no one is
talking about this and no one is
respecting the fact that
government
keeps on grabbing
for our purses.
LISA DESJARDINS: Groups like
hers are starting to change the
face of the Republican Party.
Maggie's List helped launch
Nebraska Senator Deb Fischer and
a few dozen others. The group
has 7,000 members. But that's a
fraction of the Democratic
equivalent, EMILY'S List, and
its two million members.
Shorey is undaunted.
MISSY SHOREY: We are positive,
because when we're taking a
stand and raising the issues,
we're getting tremendous
support. There's a de facto myth
out there that, somehow, because
you're a woman, that you're
automatically a liberal.
LISA DESJARDINS: As the
candidates battle for the
nomination tomorrow night, their
party
hopes the debate helps win
the fight for female voters.
For the "PBS NewsHour," Lisa
Desjardins, Simi Valley,
California.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Egypt responds to the killing of
tourists; and teaching girls
how to make video games.
But, first, a five-day teachers
strike that delayed the start of
the school year in Seattle
is nearing an end. The strike
itself was a surprise, and left
nearly -- and left parents
of nearly 50,000 students
figuring out just what to do for
days.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
was in Seattle when the
agreement was announced earlier
today.
CAT WISE: Seattle teachers
Kristin and Joe Bailey Fogarty
were getting ready for a fifth
day on the picket line and
another day out of school for
them and their daughters when
they got the news.
JOE BAILEY FOGARTY, Teacher: SEA
reached a tentative contract
agreement with the Seattle
School Board.
KRISTIN BAILEY-FOGARTY,
Teacher: No way.
CAT WISE: The news of a deal was
a surprise to Kristin and many
of her colleagues in the
union, but a welcome one that
came after an all-night
negotiating session.
KRISTIN BAILEY-FOGARTY: We hated
it. We hated being on strike. We
hate it. It's been 30
years since Seattle struck,
because it is so awful.
MAN: Thank you for your
support. Thank you.
CAT WISE: Teachers across the
city began celebrating the
likely end to Seattle's first
teachers
strike in more than 30 years,
even though details of the
agreement were still under
wraps this afternoon. District
officials praised the outcome.
GEOFF MILLER, Chief Negotiator:
In the end, we found common
ground, wanting to make sure
that our children get the best
education that they can. We
intend moving forward to work
as closely as we can with the
union to realize the goals that
we have for making the Seattle
schools the best place for
kids to go to school.
CAT WISE: The Seattle Education
Association -- that's the union
representing the district's
5,000 teachers and school staff
-- had been in negotiations with
the school district over
a new contract since May. But
just as the school year was set
to begin last Tuesday,
talks over pay raises
and more broke down.
Issues including testing, longer
instructional time, discipline
policies and even the length
of recess were on the table. But
in a city where the cost of
living is soaring, for many
teachers like Bailey-Fogarty,
pay was a top concern.
KRISTIN BAILEY-FOGARTY: The
teacher in the newspaper who had
the nanny and is married
to somebody in the tech
industry, that's the exception.
A lot of teachers are single
parents.
A lot of teachers are coming out
of school with huge student
loans, because you need
a lot of education
to be a teacher.
CAT WISE: Before a deal was
announced, teachers union
president Jonathan Knapp told us
that
wages were a key sticking point,
but he said teachers fought for
bigger issues important
to parents across Seattle and
the country, like a program to
reduce suspensions of minority
students.
JONATHAN KNAPP, President,
Seattle Education Association:
The disproportionate discipline
of certain groups of students
really matter to the parents.
You know, the testing issue
has become very important to
parents these days. So, I think
all of those resonate with
parents, and I think they would
resonate all over the country.
CAT WISE: The weeklong strike
sent parents scrambling to find
child care when schools
didn't open. The school
organized some temporary day
camps at community centers
across the
city.
This afternoon, representatives
from each school were expected
to vote to end the strike.
And classes are likely to resume
on Thursday. Over the weekend,
the entire union will vote
on whether to accept the deal.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Cat Wise in Seattle.
GWEN IFILL: The U.S. sends
hundreds of billions of dollars
worth of military aid to allies
around the world. On Sunday, the
army of one of those allies,
Egypt, killed 12 tourists.
Most of the dead were
Mexican citizens.
They were in Egypt's Western
Desert. It's an area famous for
its rock formations and
oases. It's also increasingly a
base for insurgents launching
attacks against the army.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Egyptian
government says that an Apache
helicopter crew mistook the
tourists for a group of Islamic
militants. An investigation is
ongoing.
Egypt is one of the largest
recipients of U.S. military aid
in the world, receiving
$1.3 billion annually. And even
before Sunday's incident,
there's been friction between
Washington
and Cairo over how the Egyptian
military uses American hardware.
I'm joined now by Michele Dunne,
senior associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International
Peace.
Welcome back to you.
MICHELE DUNNE, Director,
Atlantic Council's Rafik Hariri
Center for the Middle East:
Thank
you.
JEFFREY BROWN: First, what more
do we know about this incident
on Sunday?
MICHELE DUNNE: Well, what we
know is, there was a group of
tourists -- they had an Egyptian
police escort and apparently had
the proper permits -- that were
touring this -- near
an oasis in the Western Desert,
and that the convoy was
attacked, obviously by mistake,
by an Egyptian
military helicopter.
Twelve people were killed. Seven
of those seemed to have been
Mexican tourists. There
were others who were injured,
including one person who is a
dual Mexican-U.S. citizen.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, the
helicopter and these other
weapons are part of military aid
from
the U.S. to Egypt, right? This
aid had been put on hold for a
while during all the turmoil
in Egypt. Is it back
up to where it was?
MICHELE DUNNE: Yes. The United
States resumed all military aid
to Egypt earlier this year,
after having suspended after
the military coup in 2013.
Now, Egypt is fighting a serious
insurgency. So the, United
States didn't want to abandon
a longtime ally. The United
States has a very deep
investment in Egypt and
particularly
the military, to which it has
given more than $35 billion of
assistance.
JEFFREY BROWN: The larger
context here is this attempt by
President Al-Sisi to crush
this insurgency. How is
-- where does that stand?
MICHELE DUNNE: Well,
it's not going well.
There was a military coup in
Egypt a couple of years ago that
suspended an attempt at
a democratic transition. And
since then, terrorists, who
already existed in Egypt, have
really
escalated an insurgency. It
started out in the Sinai, and
that's still the main base
of it, but it has been spreading
to other parts of the country,
notably the Western
Desert, the areas near Libya,
which is where this incident
that just took place happened.
And it happened in the context
of an Egyptian army fight with
some militants in that area.
JEFFREY BROWN: This incident got
a lot of attention, but it's
just one of many, I gather.
There's a lot going on in the
Sinai, for example, right?
MICHELE DUNNE: Absolutely.
There have been very significant
insurgent operations against the
Egyptian military in
the Sinai. And, frankly, the
Egyptian military's operations
just -- just aren't working.
They
don't have a holistic strategy
against the insurgency. They
just seem to have sort of
ad hoc operations, and there are
reports of very large human
rights violations, collective
punishment and so
forth, going on.
So, at the same time that the
Egyptian military is fighting
the insurgency, in a way, it's
also fueling it by carrying out
these abuses that seem to be
channeling more and more people
toward the militant groups.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, and then to
circle back where we started,
the tension here is because,
in this country, and part is
because of the use of American
hardware. Now, does the U.S.
have it -- sell these with
strings attached? Or does it
have any sway or influence in
how
these -- how all this
military hardware is used?
MICHELE DUNNE: The U.S.
administration is trying to
exert a bit more influence, both
about over what Egypt buys with
its military aid from the U.S.
government and also how
it is used.
But the Egyptian military in
general has not wanted a lot of
advice or training. In general,
it wants a lot of hardware and
very minimal training. But the
United States recently -- for
example, Secretary of State
Kerry was just in Egypt in early
August for a strategic dialogue.
And he was pressing the issue,
including in his public remarks,
about the possible connections
between human rights abuses and
radicalization in the country
and the need for more effective
counterterrorism methods, as
well as a better political and
economic atmosphere and rights
atmosphere in the country.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, I
think we will leave it there.
And one correction before we go.
I think we said seven Mexican
citizens -- tourists were
killed. I think the number
is up to eight now.
So, Michele Dunne,
thank you so much.
MICHELE DUNNE: Thank you, Jeff.
GWEN IFILL: Now: giving girls
access to a more level playing
field in an area formerly
dominated by boys,
making video games.
Special correspondent Sandra
Hughes has the story.
SANDRA HUGHES: It's no secret
that video gaming is aimed at a
male audience. From creation
to design to playing the games,
the mostly violent first-person
shooter games target
boys, not girls.
No wonder. In 2013, women
accounted for just 11 percent of
computer game designers and
only 3 percent of programmers.
Ten-year old Scarlett Thompson
isn't too young to understand
there's a gender gap.
SCARLETT THOMPSON, Participant,
Alexa Cafe: I love video games.
SANDRA HUGHES: Do you really?
SCARLETT THOMPSON: Yes. So,
I mean, there's really...
(CROSSTALK)
SANDRA HUGHES: So, what's it
like -- what's it like for a
girl who likes video games?
Is it a tough world to be in?
SCARLETT THOMPSON: Kind of,
because then, like, you have to
compete with people, and
it's just -- sometimes it's
really hard, like, online. It's
not as fair and, like, I --
like,
oh, no I have a girl on my
team. What am I going to do?
SANDRA HUGHES: These girls want
to be more than just on the
team. They want to create
the game. They spent their
summer break, along with
thousands of others, at
girls-only computer
coding camps like the Alexa
Cafe and Code Like a Girl.
These camps aim to balance the
gender gap in the next
generation of coders by
supporting
an early interest in
technology from girls.
CLAUDIA ORTIZ, Instructor, Code
Like a Girl: We're trying to
create that environment, say,
hey, you could be the world's
best coder. It doesn't have to
be your brother or it doesn't
have to be, like, a
male. It can be you.
TE STEVENS, Participant, Code
Like a Girl: It's called Code
Like a Girl because we want
to be treated equal, but that
doesn't mean that I totally say,
oh, boys stink, because
that would be kind of not really
-- that would kind of
hypocritical, I guess.
OLIVIA FISHMAN, Participant,
Code Like a Girl: It's awesome
because we all are here to learn
more. We all have great
intellectual minds. And we're
all very curious. And we all
have
great ideas. And we all -- we
feed off of each other with our
great ideas.
SANDRA HUGHES: These young
coders say that learning in an
all-girl environment has allowed
them to focus more on
cooperation and less on the
competition they feel in school
when
working with boys.
KENDALL MCDERMOTT, Participant,
Code Like a Girl: At school,
there's always been a little
bit of an issue when we do
robotics unit. They think they
are the only ones capable
of coding and doing the work.
So, often, it becomes a lot
harder to do any of the work,
or when you bounce an idea off
someone, they're more like, no,
my idea is right.
But, here, it's a lot of, you to
ask someone for an idea and they
are very, oh, here, let
me help you. And it's a lot less
of, no, you are wrong. And so
it's just really nice to
be in a really
collaborative environment.
SANDRA HUGHES: Eleven-year old
Kendall McDermott hasn't found
boys collaborative or even
friendly
when she plays online video
games. To avoid harassment, she
plays online as a he.
KENDALL MCDERMOTT: So, usually,
I avoid mentioning gender, which
makes it a lot more enjoyable.
But it's kind of sad to think
that if you, say -- if you check
the -- because when they
say, are you male or female, if
you check female, sometimes, you
get a lot of hackers
and spammers and people saying
rude things, even though they
know nothing about you and
don't have a photo
of you or anything.
SANDRA HUGHES: The camp
instructors see differences in
how girls and boys create their
games.
TE STEVENS: She's Supergirl,
right, so she has to save
somebody.
SANDRA HUGHES: Girls games focus
more on a narrative than
competition.
Is there a difference between
sort of the boys and the girls
do online and in camps?
SCARLETT THOMPSON: I don't think
there's a difference. But I
think that girls will make
it more friendly and more, like,
visual and happy, instead of,
like, just gun games and
dark and gloomy and scary.
SANDRA HUGHES: At Alexa Cafe,
the girls design games aimed at
having a positive social impact,
like Scarlett's plan
to save sea turtles.
SCARLETT THOMPSON: I made a
game, and it was, you clean up
all the trash before the turtles
get them, and you have like
three seconds to do it. It's
actually pretty hard.
SANDRA HUGHES: Why do you think,
Scarlett, it's important for
girls to get to understand
technology and get involved with
coding and gaming and all of
this? Why do girls need
to get involved more?
SCARLETT THOMPSON: When girls
start to run, like, these video
games, then it will just
help a lot, because then girls
will allow girls to come on that
video game.
SANDRA HUGHES: And get more
and more girls, right?
SCARLETT THOMPSON: Yes.
SANDRA HUGHES: And then it'll
be fair and it'll be even.
SCARLETT THOMPSON: Yes.
SANDRA HUGHES: Right now,
it's not so fair and even?
SCARLETT THOMPSON: Mm-mmm.
KENDALL MCDERMOTT: If you only
have one type of person thinking
about something, and they
can't find a solution to a
problem, that might be because
the way they are coming -- they
are coming to it. I think,
sometimes, girls might have a
different interpretation of the
problem, and that way, it means
they might come up with a
different solution.
SANDRA HUGHES: A solution that
includes both boys and girls
coding together and creating
games they both will enjoy.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Sandra Hughes in Los Angeles.
GWEN IFILL: Infant mortality,
life expectancy, heart disease,
obesity, in almost every area
of health outcomes, black
people are more vulnerable.
In the latest addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf, one
African-American doctor talks
about what
that looks like from the inside.
Jeff is back with that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Being black
can be bad for your health.
It's a lesson Damon Tweedy
writes in his new book, "Black
Man in a White Coat: A Doctor's
Reflections on Race and
Medicine," that he learned time
and again in his own life and
in his many years as a doctor.
Tweedy is a psychiatrist at Duke
University, where he
also attended medical school.
And welcome to you.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY, Author, "Black
Man in a White Coat: A Doctor's
Reflections on Race
and Medicine" Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you start
with this big subject. Is that
what started it for you,
that you wanted to write about?
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Yes.
So, race is this really highly
charged political subject that
we have in our society,
obviously,
but, for me, this is a very
personal story. This is really
kind of about my experience
and my journey.
All too often in medical school,
you learn about health problems
in the black community,
you learn -- you hear this
disease is more common than
this. It's always more common
in black people, but you didn't
really hear why. And so it
wasn't -- and the question
of why is a huge issue for me.
And there was also a big
question about how my experience
as a young black man was
different
than the experiences of
other people in my class.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that comes
through, because you're also
saying that, as a young doctor
in training, you're saying
constantly hearing about the
medical frailties of black
people
picked at the scab of your
insecurity. You didn't set out
thinking about medicine and
race.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: No, I was
actually attracted to medicine.
It was sort of like this -- it
was almost like a post-racial
kind of mind-set I had.
Medicine to me held it appeal to
being objective, formulas,
equations. And it was really --
and
that was appealing. So much of
society is messy, and life is
messy as a black person.
So this -- it was this appeal
that it could be objective.
And then, when I got to medical
school, I kind of got a rude
awakening that it wasn't.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you refer to
your insecurities, what do you
mean?
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: I come from
Prince George's County,
Maryland. And it was an
all-black
neighborhood that I grew up in,
just outside of Washington, D.C.
And I went to a state college.
Then I got to Duke. Duke is a
fancy private school. A
lot of my classmates had parents
who were doctors. And so I was
really insecure about
that.
And as a black person, there is
always a sort of thing about, is
affirmative action part
of why you're here, and do you
really belong? And so I
grappling with all those things
when
I first got to medical school.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write about a
number of incidents that you
witnessed in which you
saw white doctors unaware of the
different ways that they were
treating black patients.
How much in the end did you
conclude that race does a play
factor in the doctor's room,
in the hospital room?
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: I think it
plays a big factor, and often in
ways that the doctor and the
patient may not
even be aware of.
And there are several examples I
talk about in the book. And
there is one example in
particular,
so it comes to mind off the top
of my head. This was a time when
I was going to the clinic
myself as a patient. So, I'm
coming from home. And I had
injured my knee a few days
earlier.
And I'm dressed very casually in
sweatpants and a sweatshirt. And
I come into the exam
room with the doctor. And he
comes in. And he never looks at
me. He just looks at my
knee and sort of has me stand up
and down and then says, you're
OK, and kind of was
going to shuttle me away.
And being a doctor, I knew that
there was more that could be
done or should have been
done. And so I mentioned to him
that I'm a doctor. And then,
suddenly, he looks at me,
and his eyes kind of light up.
And he looks at my knee. He
starts to talk to me. And so
he really engages in the sort of
doctor-patient exchange, the way
that it should have been
from the beginning.
And it was a really vivid
illustration of how differently
I can -- perceived. On one
hand, I could just be a young
black man who is off the street
somewhere. And who knows
what negative presumptions he
may have had, because he didn't
engage with me at all. And
then once he realizes I'm a
doctor, it was like a totally
different experience.
And so I think that really
illustrates how differently
things can play out in the exam
room.
JEFFREY BROWN: You
became a psychiatrist.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why?
DR. DAMON TWEEDY:
Great question.
I never thought, when I went to
medical school, I would become
-- come to psychiatry.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: But as I got
towards the end of medical
school, I took this one rotation
just on a flyer, and I really
enjoyed it. And the patients
told my supervisors that
I had a way with -- of relaxing
people and getting them to talk
to me and I had a way
of connecting with people.
And so that really made me think
about psychiatry. There is also
this huge issue as an
African-American.
And the mental health in the
black community is really a big
deal, because, often, black
people will be resistant to
mental health care or feel like
it's something that's not
for them. And there is this huge
sort of stigma that we often
deal with.
And so, as a psychiatrist, I
have often been one of the only
few black psychiatrist. And
so it's a huge deal
there as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, this is
something important that you
have written a lot about, the
dearth
of the black doctors generally.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you're
pointing to that as one of the
important factors of why blacks
fair so poorly in
the medical system.
Why? Why is it important to
have more black doctors?
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Yes.
So, African-Americans make up
about 13 percent of the
population, but about 4 percent
of
physicians. And it's like --
mental health and psychiatry, it
is about the same, really
low numbers.
And what you often see is that
there is this issue of the
patients don't trust the health
care system because there has
been a bad history of things
that have happened in the past.
And so often, as a black doctor,
I'm there to help sort of be a
translator in a way.
JEFFREY BROWN: So that's why
we need more black doctors.
At the same time, I saw recently
the Association of American
Medical Colleges, a new report
that applications from
African-American men have
declined...
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Yes, exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: ...
from 1978 to recently.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY:
Right. Exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why?
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Yes.
So, the numbers for black women
have actually increased during
that time.
But I think there's this bigger
issue about the way society from
the very top down kind
of limits the horizons and the
expectations of what
African-American men can be. And
I
think that really filters down.
It starts from the top and it
filters down into the
communities.
I come from that kind of
community, where the idea of
being a doctor was sort of an
alien concept. And it was only
the -- I had the good fortune of
having an older brother
who had gone to college and then
being in a program -- I tested
into a program that
really set -- a magnet program
that really set me on that path.
But there all too many young
black men who don't have those
opportunities. And there
is talent being squandered. And
so I think that is the big
factor.
JEFFREY BROWN: I know this is a
sort of personal memoir for you.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Have you thought
about larger questions of
policy-type questions of what
should be done, either in the
medical profession or the wider
society?
DR. DAMON TWEEDY: Sure.
And in the book, I talk about
some of those. I talk about the
Affordable Care Act and its
-- the way it's helped and the
way it's been undercut by sort
of the politics of all of
it.
I also talk about ways in which
doctors and patients can be --
can sort of be educated
to have a better relationship,
because I think that's -- a huge
issue in my book is about
the doctor and patient
relationship. And when that's
frayed, that really makes a huge
impact
on patients. And, ultimately,
the way our society is set up,
often, black people are
the ones who are facing the
biggest consequence for that.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
The new book is "Black
Man in a White Coat."
Dr. Damon Tweedy,
thank you so much.
DR. DAMON TWEEDY:
Thank you, sir.
GWEN IFILL: Before we go
tonight, an update on the flash
floods in Utah.
Officials at Zion National Park
say three are dead and four
others are missing after
the floods washed through that
park. Twelve people were killed
last night in the flooding
near the Arizona border.
And, finally, our "NewsHour"
Shares of the day, something
that caught our eye which might
be of interest to you, too.
Today marks the halfway point in
a year-long mission on the
International Space Station. The
goal? To figure out the
long-term effects on the human
body from being out
of this world.
They are comparing NASA
astronaut Scott Kelly, up in the
station, with his identical twin
brother, retired astronaut Mark
Kelly, back here on Earth.
Yesterday, NASA offered
a progress report.
SCOTT KELLY, NASA Astronaut: As
far as physically, you know, I
feel good. You know, we have
some
pretty good exercise equipment
up here, but there are a lot of
effects of this environment
that we can't see or feel, like
bone loss, effects on our
vision, effects on our genetics,
our DNA, RNA and proteins,
things like that.
So they can look at that data
and look at the data they
collect with him over this year
and see what kind of deviations
we have on a genetic level,
which, you know, could be
a result of this environment,
the weightlessness of the
environment, the radiation that
we
see, and, you know, from that
figure out other areas we need
to investigate, so we can, you
know, eventually complete our
journey to Mars and elsewhere.
QUESTION: What is your role in
the twin study here on the
ground, and how much time does
it take?
MARK KELLY, Former NASA
Astronaut: So far, my role has
been to provide samples, blood,
saliva, other things I'm
not going to go into...
(LAUGHTER)
MARK KELLY: ... and be there for
MRIs and ultrasounds and even
some experiments. Sometimes,
I will be laying in some kind of
contraption. I don't even know
what they're trying to figure
out. I'm just like, do
whatever you need to do.
So, we have data on a lot of
people out to six months being
in space. So, we have a pretty
good idea of what happens in
that six-month period. We have
no data beyond six months.
So, maybe there becomes a bend
in the curve. And what I mean by
that is, we know people's
vision gets worse over the
six-month period, but maybe at
nine months or 10 months, maybe
it gets really, really bad.
And imagine you're trying to
send a crew to go work and live
on Mars for an extended period
of time, but that, by the time
they get there, we find out
they're going to be nearly blind
from the environment.
That's a big problem.
So that's part of the idea of
doing this research over a
one-year period.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: For a city whose slogan
is Keep Austin Weird,
these artists are model
citizens, combining puppetry and
cycling. The collective known
as Austin Bike Zoo builds giant
animal puppets on wheels. Watch
the video on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.